The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Irish Peasant, by Anonymous


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Irish Peasant
       the History of Peter Lacy and his wife Susan


Author: Anonymous



Release Date: May 8, 2020  [eBook #62059]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IRISH PEASANT***


Transcribed from the 19th Century Religious Tract Society edition by
David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org

                        [Picture: Pamphlet cover]

                                                                  No. 187.





                                   THE
                              IRISH PEASANT;


                                    OR

                        THE HISTORY OF PETER LACY,

                            AND HIS WIFE SUSAN

                  [Picture: Peter Lacy and the Minister]

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                              _Printed for_
                       THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY,
                            _Instituted_ 1799
            AND SOLD AT THEIR DEPOSITORY, 56, PATERNOSTER-ROW;
           BY J. NISBET, 21, BERNERS-STREET, OXFORD-STREET; AND
                          BY OTHER BOOKSELLERS.




CHAP. I.


IT was on a dull, cold evening that Peter Lacy, a poor labourer, having
finished the clump of turf which he had engaged to do, put on his ragged
coat, and walked up to the door of his employer to receive his wages.  “I
have no silver at present,” said the gentleman, “but come next Monday,
and you shall be paid.”

It was three miles to his home, and, on his way, he passed the cabin of a
poor man whom he knew very well.  There was a little garden before it,
and every thing looked clean and decent.  It was true the family who
lived there were very poor, and met with many crosses; but, let what
would happen, Michael Connor and his wife were always cheerful, and were
never heard to complain, because they were sure that nothing happens by
chance, having read in the Bible, that not even a sparrow falleth to the
ground without the knowledge of God.

“There now,” said Lacy to himself, “there’s the comfort of a quiet wife!
Mary Connor is always good tempered and mild; while my Susan is for
making bad worse, by her crying and scolding at every hand’s turn.  A dry
morsel with a quiet house, is better than plenty of provision with
grumbling.”  Lacy did not know that Solomon had said nearly the same: for
Lacy never read the Bible; and as for going to prayers, he left it to
those who had a better coat than his to put on.

“Well neighbour,” said Connor, “how does the world jog with you?”

“It’s all on three legs,” said Lacy, “for ’tis money makes the mare to
go, and money I have none.”

“I wish I could help you,” said Connor, “but I got my week’s wages
yesterday, and lent them to Wilson, whose wife is sick in bed: he was to
pay me to-day, but went home without thinking of it; however, walk in and
rest yourself.”

Mary welcomed her husband with smiles, and had made the room very neat
against his return.  The table was scoured as clean as sand and water
could make it; the hearth was nicely swept, and the dinner was over the
fire.

“Come sit down,” said the good-natured Connor, “eat an egg, and Mary
shall put a bit of bacon on the gridiron that we bought the other day.”
“No, no,” replied Lacy, “keep it for your dinner to-morrow, you will have
but a poor meal at best.”

Mary understood what he meant: she hung down her head for a minute; but
then looking cheerful again, she said, “If you have not got the money, my
dear, we must do the best we can—while God sends us health, and thankful
hearts, we need not complain at the want of a meal’s meat.”

“You are a good woman, Mrs. Connor,” said Lacy; “my Susan will give me no
such comfort.”

“Perhaps,” said Mary, “you do not encourage her to do so.”

“Encourage,” replied Lacy; “I don’t know what you mean by that—I work
hard all the week, never spending a farthing at the public house on
Saturdays, and on Sundays we have a snug, piping hot dinner, and a glass
of punch into the bargain.”

“And how do you pass the evening?” asked Connor.

“Oh, very well,” says Lacy; “Susan, perhaps, puts on her cloak, and goes
to Nancy Dillon, while her good man and I smoke a pipe quietly together.”

“Do you never go to prayers?” said Mary.

“To be sure I do, now and then,” replied Lacy, “and Susan goes whenever
she gets a new riband to her old hat, to make her look decent.  Indeed
she went twice, to my certain knowledge, the day that his Honour’s
housekeeper gave her the new stuff gown.”

Mary shook her head, and Lacy was displeased.

“May be,” said he, “you think we are not religious, as you call it; but
I’ll be bound we’re as good Christians as those that make such a fuss
about it.  I learned the ten commandments when I was a boy, and remember
them well enough to keep them now.”

“And do you think keeping the commandments in the sort of way you talk
of, will bring you to heaven?” said Connor.

“Indeed I do,” replied Lacy, “what else should bring me there?”

“And are you sure,” said Connor, “that you keep the commandments, and
never break one of them?”

“It’s myself that thinks so,” said Lacy, “and I defy you, or any one
else, to say to the contrary.”

“I will show you presently,” said Connor, taking down a neat Bible.

“No thank you,” said Lacy, “I could have enough of that if I liked it;
but I am not fond of preaching: it’s poor feeding for those who want
bread.”

“Isn’t the Bible said to be the bread of life?” cried Mary.

“It may be so,” said he, “but I can’t live on a book.”

“Ah, neighbour, if you would but learn to look up to God!” said Mary.

“Pho!” replied Lacy, rising, and throwing his spade over his shoulder,
“Connor, with all your talk, you are worse off than me—how will you feed
those four hungry little ones to-morrow?”

“We don’t fret ourselves much about that,” said Mary, for “He that
feedeth the young ravens, has promised that he will not suffer the
children of his servants to cry for food in vain.”

“And if they do,” added Connor, “we can fast: the Son of God knew hunger
and thirst for _many_ days, and shall we grumble if he lets us feel them
for _one_?”

Lacy could not think of any answer beyond “good night.”  As he walked
home his temper got worse: he wondered why Connor should cant like a
preacher; and he thought Mary’s content was all pretence; but as it made
her so quiet, he wished his Susan could learn it.

People often bring on a quarrel by seeming to expect one.  When Susan saw
him she ran with joyful looks saying, “Oh, Peter!  I’ve got the nicest
plan for to-morrow!—But, how sulky you are!  What is the matter?—Where is
the tea?  Why, you look as black as that cloud.”

“Aye, wife,” he replied, “I am the cloud, and you are the thunder—there’s
neither tea, nor potatoes, nor money to buy them.”

“No money?—Where are your wages?”

“The gentleman hadn’t silver or brass in his company,” said Lacy, “so now
begin to scold.”

“There, there,” screamed Susan, “you are always picking a quarrel with
me, because you find me so easy with you.  No wages! no tea!—and you to
be sent home without a penny in your pocket.”

She went on in this way for a long time; then looking at a parcel which
lay carefully folded up, on a chair, her voice grew very sad, and she
whined out,—“There!  I’ve been working my poor fingers to the bone this
live-long day! and I’ve turned my gown from top to bottom, till it looks
as good as new; and I was going to ask Nancy Dillon to drink tea, and
walk out among the neighbours, and all—but I am an unhappy creature, and
you are a wicked, bad man to do so.”  When, just as her voice was lost
with crying and scolding, the door opened, and Connor came in.

“I ask pardon,” said he, “for coming in so smart to ye: but I ran all the
way, to ask ye to come and dine with us to-morrow—Wilson brought the
money, and we shall have a bit of meat for you.”

Susan dried her eyes, unfolded her stuff gown, and smiled.  “Thank you
kindly,” said Lacy, “but you have so many of your own.”

“Never mind,” replied Connor—“the more the merrier; come early, and go to
prayers with us.”




CHAP. II.


HOW pleasant is the Sabbath! and how good is God, who not only allows,
but demands for the humblest of his creatures, a day of rest—the poor
horse who dragged the heavy plough all the week, now crops the grass at
his ease, or draws a mouthful of hay from the crib.  The patient ass who
drew many a basket of turf to the town, now rambles by the side of the
road, and feeds on the thistles in the hedge.  I hope there are no
children so cruel as to teaze and torment him.  “God is the Maker of all
creatures,” said Michael Connor to his little boys, “and he will punish
those who wantonly hurt even the poor ass.”

Peter Lacy came, with his wife, in good time for the morning prayers.
Susan looked very smart, and held up her head; but Mary did not seem a
bit less happy than she did.  Mary had no gay stuff gown, but one of
plain blue check; with a black bonnet, which looked new because it was
carefully kept, and not tossed about and dirtied.  She learned from her
Bible that pride is hateful to God, and that the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit is what He loves, and fitter for a Christian woman than the
plaiting the hair, and putting on of rich apparel.  “Indeed it is
melancholy,” she would often say, “to behold a poor body, made from the
dust of the earth, and returning to it again, pampered and puffed up, as
if it was a great thing in the sight of God; while the immortal soul is
left neglected; and, if found unprepared to meet the Judge at the last
day, together with the naked, shivering body, will be sentenced to be
cast into the lake of eternal fire.”

They soon set out for prayers, and the two eldest boys went with them.

Lacy could not help observing how devoutly Connor and Mary joined in the
whole service: he looked and wondered; he could not feel as they did, nor
pray like them, but he wished to do so; nor was he disappointed in the
end:—God, who sees the heart of man, and knows all his thoughts, will
answer the humble prayers of a soul that begins to feel his own
sinfulness, and the want of a Saviour; the effect of the Holy Spirit’s
influence on those that seek Him.

All this time Susan was looking about her; but though there was not so
smart a gown in that place, very few minded the pattern.

In his sermon, the clergyman spoke like a father to his children.  Among
other things, he told them in particular, “how sinful and how ignorant
they were by nature, and how useless all endeavours of their own to
please God must be, unless they come to Him by his Son,” (John xiv. 6.)
through whose blood alone they could be cleansed from all sin, and
clothed in the wedding garment of the Saviour’s righteousness.—That they
must be taught of God to feel the plague of their own hearts, and loathe
sin.  That being brought to a sense of their lost state, and to an entire
dependence upon the merits of their Saviour, and upon them alone, for
pardon, they should, seeking the blessing humbly in God’s appointed way,
receive the gift of a new heart; their former inclinations and sinful
ways being exchanged for godly desires and holy pursuits, and they should
become “new creatures.”  For, “if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.”
2 Cor. v. 17.

He spoke also of what followed upon this great change, of the fruits of
this conversion from sin unto righteousness, how the true Christian was
full of tenderness to his fellow-creatures, “and loved his neighbour as
himself.”  He showed that they could not any longer allow themselves to
give way to their passions; in particular, he mentioned the evil nature
of anger, which Christians must entirely forsake; and that provoking to
anger was a thing equally bad.

It was a discourse that went to Lacy’s very heart: he would have given
the world to have understood it better; and as for his wife, she, for
once, forgot her gown while she listened to the sermon.

Lacy and Susan asked no questions till after dinner, when Connor had very
devoutly returned thanks to God for all the good things he sent them.  At
last he said, “Connor, did you understand the sermon?”

“Yes, through God’s blessing, I trust I did,” replied Connor.

“Now I listened all through,” said Lacy, “but could make out very little
of what he meant, except when he spoke about anger, and such other evil
passions,” looking at Susan.

“And of provoking to anger,” said Susan, looking at him.

“But did you not understand what he said about loving one another?” asked
Mary.

“Why, yes, I think so,” replied Lacy; “but what did he mean by our coming
to Christ to be cleansed and clothed?”

“He meant,” answered Connor, “as the Bible shows, that nothing could wash
away our sins but the blood that was shed on the cross for us—and that
renouncing all dependence upon our own works, we must take for the
garment of salvation, the righteousness of Christ, which alone can make
us fit to appear before God.”

“I suppose,” said Susan, “there were some very wicked people there, and
the clergyman meant it for them.”

“Aye,” said Connor, “and for the very best people there too;—there are
none in the world fit to enter heaven without being so cleansed and so
clothed.”

“That is odd!” exclaimed Lacy, “for supposing that you and I, and the two
wives, are all sinners, sure the little boys cannot be sinners?”

“Oh, yes we are, indeed?” said little William, shaking his head
sorrowfully, “Peter and I are bad boys: I told a lie twice; and Peter
pulled an apple that father told him not to touch.”

“Poor dears!” said Susan; “and do you think such little trifles will keep
you out of heaven?”

“All sin will do so,” said Connor; “a small penknife will destroy life,
as well as a great sword; they knew it was wrong, yet they did it, and
that was sin.  Little as they are, they already feel the want of pardon
for their sin, through the Lord Jesus Christ.”

Lacy felt somewhat alarmed.  “If this be true,” thought he, “what a vile
sinner am I!”

He leaned his head on his hand, for some time; then striking the table,
he exclaimed, “I shall never understand all this.”

“Good neighbour, it _cannot_ be learned without the grace of God to teach
us.”

“How may a body get that grace?” said Lacy.

“By praying for it,” replied Mary; “we should often say, ‘Lord teach us
to pray.’  Our Saviour says, ‘Him that cometh unto me, I will in no wise
cast out.’  ‘Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full;’ ‘seek
and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.’”

“And will praying teach me every thing,” said Lacy.

“The Holy Spirit will teach you,” replied Connor, “to understand what you
read in the Bible, and hear on the Sabbath.  When we read the Scriptures
let our prayer be, ‘Lord, open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous
things out of thy law.’”

“Well, if I had time, I would read the Bible,” said Lacy.

“Cannot you read it, as I do, of an evening after work, and on Sundays?”

“No,” said Lacy, “I am too tired at night to bother myself with book
learning; and Sunday is the only day I have for making merry.”

Thus does Satan try to smother the first sparks of conviction in our
hearts, and make us unwilling to strive for a blessing.

Lacy and Susan thought themselves excellent Christians for having been to
prayers; and in the labour of the week they soon forgot the warning voice
of the clergyman and of Connor.




CHAP. III.


THE next Sunday at breakfast, Lacy said, “Will you go to prayers, Susan?”

“Yes,” said Susan, “I think I will.”

“So will I,” replied Lacy, “but don’t it look like rain?”

“To be sure the clouds are blackish,” answered Susan; “but perhaps it may
clear up.”

Lacy yawned, stretched himself, lighted his pipe, and fell into a fit of
thinking.  An hour after, he said, looking out at the door, “’Tis too
late now.”

“That is your fault,” said Susan, “I was willing to go.”

Lacy was about making a sharp reply, but recollecting what the clergyman
had said about provoking one another to anger, he held his tongue; and
when Susan went out of the room he felt as proud as if he had killed a
lion; for nothing is so pleasant as thinking we have been enabled to
overcome a bad inclination.  “I think,” said he, “I shall get very good
now, after this, by myself.”

Susan now came back with her gown, and hung it before the fire, for the
weather had been damp.

“Keep your nasty pipe out of the way,” said she to her husband, “or my
gown will be spoiled.”

“What a fuss you make about your gown,” replied he; “it would be well if
you thought as much of washing my shirt.”

“No matter,” said she, “I say you shan’t smoke my gown.”

“And I say I’ll do as I like, wife,” replied he.  “Tobacco won’t hurt
your gown—look here,” and he was so mischievous as to let some of the
ashes fall on it.

Susan cried out, snatched his pipe, broke it, and threw the pieces at
him.

This was too much for Lacy’s patience, though he was not often
passionate: he seized the gown, and running to the door, tossed it into
the mud that lay in the front of the house.

Much altercation here ensued—Lacy ran out of the house.  “Ah!” thought
he, “if we had gone to prayers this would not have happened.”  He felt
ashamed of having taken such a revenge on his wife, after provoking her
as he did; but he was too stubborn to go back and be friends with her.
He walked on towards Connor’s cabin, and as he passed the door he plainly
heard the sobs of a woman within.

Such a sound was very strange in that happy and quiet place—he stopped at
the door, and heard Mary sob out—“I know, I know, he will protect
them:—preserve them—but my life—my husband!”  She could say no more, and
Lacy entered.

There, on his humble bed, lay poor Connor! death was pictured in his
face; his cheeks were pale, his lips blue, his eyes hollow: he looked now
on his wife and children, and seemed full of grief, but then he looked up
to heaven, and was comforted.

Mary sat beside him: her apron was drenched in her tears; she tried to
hide her sorrow and to quiet her sobs, but she could not: her eyes were
searching about every where, as if for some comfort; but when she saw the
altered face of her husband, she almost went distracted, and could only,
like him, look up to God in humble submission.

William sat on his low stool with his little sister on his lap, Peter was
crying by his mother’s knee, and the baby was asleep in the cradle.

William was the first who saw Lacy, and trying to speak he burst into
sobs and cries.

His father turned slowly his eyes towards him, and saw Lacy; a look of
satisfaction appeared on his countenance, and then Mary saw him too.

Her grief broke out again, “Oh, neighbour, neighbour, he is dying!” she
exclaimed.  Lacy could not speak a word, but he shook her by the hand,
and then leaned over Connor.  “Lacy,” said the poor man, in a weak voice,
“you wonder to see me thus—you left me well and hearty lost night, but a
carriage was run away with, and the horses went over me; I am dying.”

“Let me go for a doctor,” cried Lacy.

“He has been here—there is no hope.”  Connor spoke these words calmly,
but they seemed to cut Mary to the heart.

“No hope, no hope,” she repeated; “he must die.”

“Don’t die, father,” said little Peter, in a piteous voice.  “Oh, father,
father, surely you are not going to leave us!” sobbed William; “who will
teach us the Bible, or show us the way to heaven any more?”

“I wish I could, O Lord teach me!” exclaimed Lacy, and he groaned.

“God grant that prayer!” cried the pious Connor.  “I know he hears it,
and I trust his Holy Spirit will lead you to Jesus, my friend, and teach
you to lead others there.”

“He cannot,” said Lacy, in an agony, “I am too vile, too sinful, too
wicked, he cannot.”

“He will,” replied Connor fervently, “if you are now sensible of sin, and
feel the need of a Saviour, you will find him; and your dying hour will
be as peaceful as mine.”

Lacy was quite overcome: he sat down, covered his face, and wept.  Even
Mary spared a look of kindness from her dying husband to the awakened
sinner.

The clergyman had been sent for, and now came in: he looked with concern
on poor Connor, who forgot his own sufferings, and pointing to Lacy,
said, “Comfort him,” then whispered Mary to send for Susan.

The clergyman touched Lacy’s shoulder, and said, “My friend, raise
yourself, and behold the instructive scene—the death-bed of a Christian.”

He obeyed, and came near the bed with those who had arrived to visit
their dying neighbour; for Connor was loved, or at least respected by all
who knew him.

“Sir,” said Connor to the clergyman, “I trust that my sins, which are
many and great, are forgiven.”

“The blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin,” replied the clergyman,
“only believe, and thou shalt see the glory of God.”

“It is so,” cried Connor, “I feel it, I leave my wife and children; but
my Saviour I cannot leave; to him I cling.”

“And he will support you,” replied the clergyman, “through the dark
valley of the shadow of death.  This is no late death-bed repentance;
you, my brother, sought the Lord and he was found of you: you came to
Jesus for help, when health and strength were your own, and he will not
leave nor forsake you now in your distress.”

“Yet I cannot help feeling some anxiety,” said Connor, “when I remember
that the years I passed in sinful blindness of heart, are far more than
the days in which I strove to walk with God.”

“It is the gracious promise of our God,” replied the Clergyman, “to his
believing people, that their sins and iniquities he will remember no
more.”

Susan now came in, but was too much shocked to speak.  “My dear,” said
Connor to Mary, “cherish that poor couple, and with God’s help strive to
assist them in their way to heaven.”

He was now going apace: they all kneeled down and joined the clergyman in
prayers for the dying man.

Connor uttered some faint sounds—Mary bent to hear them; his words were,
“I know that my Redeemer liveth,” and they were his last.

The poor widow arose: dreadful was the struggle between the repinings of
nature and pious resignation, but the latter prevailed: she raised her
clasped hands and said, “The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord!”

Susan looked at her: she recollected her own sinful passion and
resentment on her late trifling loss; she condemned herself, she knew
that she could never make her own peace with God, and for the first time
in her life she felt the want of a Mediator.

The good clergyman pointed to the corpse, and said, “There is a lesson
never to be forgotten: he was of the world: he was in darkness, until it
pleased God by the light of his Holy Spirit to take away that darkness,
and direct him to the only sure refuge, the Lord Jesus Christ.  From that
first dawn it has shone more and more unto the perfect day.  He grew in
grace, and prayed to be strengthened and confirmed in it.

“For him death had no terrors, but appeared the gate of life: the grave
only seemed to him like a dark passage, and he looked beyond it to
everlasting light and glory in heaven.

“Who can behold the mild countenance of our departed brother, and not
exclaim, ‘Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be
like his!’”

Oh, Reader, may you thus live—thus die!!!

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

           London: Printed for The RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY; and
       sold at their Depository, 56, Paternoster-row; by J. NISBET,
              21, Berners-street; and by other Booksellers.
                           [Price 4s. per 100]
         _Considerable Allowance to Subscribers and Booksellers_.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IRISH PEASANT***


******* This file should be named 62059-0.txt or 62059-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/2/0/5/62059


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

